years ago boris johnson said it would be
inhuman to cancel christmas
kind of upset about it but what can we
do we will lose out but
at the end of the as i said effort will
help us
we've got to do it but for leslie nelson
the decision has far
greater consequences it just seems so
unfair
for somebody like me i'm terminally ill
i won't be here next christmas my
sister's going to be sitting at home by
herself
100 miles away and her presence is under
the tree
many people's hopes of a happy ending to
a very tough year
have now been dashed nick dole abc news
london
during europe's first wave of
coronavirus cases ski resorts were a key
source of infection
and now while the ski fields are
bustling there's a bit of debate about
whether they should be allowed to open
germany and france want to shut them all
down but switzerland
remains defiantly opposed europe
correspondent lynton besser reports from
mont blanc
at chamonix in france the world's
greatest gondola has been brought back
to earth
because of the pandemics everything is
closed in germany
the resort on the flanks of mont blanc
is closed
part of a french push to shut down
europe's ski fields
we must do everything to avoid a third
wave do everything to avoid a third
lockdown
so nobody gonna come we can't access the
mountain
yeah it's uh it's a bit scary because
we wonder if we will work all
people are very very upset by this
situation and
for some of them it's dramatic several
french ski towns recently held protests
against the closure including chamonix
it was a symbol of the crisis the social
crisis they face
because a lot of them said that they
have not enough money to
to to go on locals here are frustrated
especially as the rules don't apply to
their neighbours
drive a few kilometers out of chamonix
and across the border
and it's another story altogether
because switzerland has decided
its ski industry is simply too valuable
to close down on the other side of mont
blanc
verbier one of the world's premier
resorts
is open for business
while switzerland is defying its
european neighbours
it's also insisting on social distancing
and limiting the number of people
in each gondola it's extremely important
for for switzerland and
in that region there is one job out of
four which is depending on
on this activity skiing for for many
people is a
plaything of the rich but in switzerland
it's not it's a fabric of
life australian marcus brata one of
verbier's most
prominent hoteliers is desperate for the
scheme to work
we've been told by the federal
government that we are very privileged
to be able to open up
our neighbors in france and austria are
not open
thousands of locals rely on the resort
including mountain guide
melanie cortes it's a problem for the
whole valley because if the bear doesn't
work the valley doesn't work
but with thousands of infections per day
in switzerland the rest of europe
can only hope at ski resorts don't
unleash another wave
before the vaccines take hold lynton
besser
abc news will be
[Music]
in basketball the south side flyers have
capped off a dominant wnbl
season by beating hometown favourites
the townsville fire
99 points to 82 in the grand final
it was an even contest until the flyers
gained control in the second half
icing the game to claim their first
championship in eight years
tropical townsville the culmination of a
whirlwind
season more than 50 games in six weeks
as the home crowd got behind its side
and it was the underdogs who started
with more intense about two seconds
south side's liz cambage was in foul
trouble early
but the flyers hit back
says get that out of here to level the
score at quarter time the physicality
continued in the second
although the flyers leilani mitchell is
given too much space
she is landing the teams traded threes
and the lead townsville's teenage star
shyla hill
showing her desperation mitchell's
dominance handed her side a two-point
lead at the main break
hey mitchell she is smokey shot feels
good but our defense is just absolutely
atrocious right now so we need to square
that up and make some adjustments
halftime
cambage returned after just three
minutes of court time in the first half
but fouled again the fire started to
lose the grip
as the flyers took a hold it down to
eight points
an animated cambash pushing the margin
out to 10 at the final break
the opel star fouled and was sidelined
again
but her teammates stepped up
and the buffer got bigger it started to
unravel for the fire
another beckhole basket icing the game
and then it was party time the flyers
are showing
why they were the favorites the wnbl
championship he's headed back to
melbourne's south side
the emotions spilled over after a tough
season in the north queensland hub
this has been the biggest grind of the
basketball season i've ever felt
it's it's just released you know
mitchell was awarded best player with 31
points
the flyers victory ends an eight-year
championship drought
tom maddox abc news batsman joe burns
has been cleared of any serious
damage after he was hit by a bouncer in
australia's demolition of india
in the first test at the adelaide oval
and while the tourists are desperate to
recover
there are signs they'll lose a key
placement to injury
before the boxing day test at the mcg
under pressure and under fire joe burns
copped this
it's nasty with his position in the side
clearly in doubt burns needed runs and
so after treatment
faced the attack again and eventually
came out on top
joe burns gets to 15 and australia
win by eight wickets great quarter
you know keep him in the in the side um
so happy for him today scans of his
elbow have cleared burns of serious
damage
and australia's batting could also be
bolstered for the second test with the
return of david warner from a groin
strain
suffered in the one day series the
indians plight appears far worse
their premier batsman captain virat
khali will miss the rest of the series
as he returns home for the birth of his
first child but he believes india can
get off the canvas for the boxing day
bout at the mcg
i'm very very confident that we'll
bounce back strongly in the next one
kohli admits producing india's lowest
ever test score was poor
but insists the collapse has to be put
in perspective
they bought similar lengths in the first
innings as well and
we were just better in terms of handling
it and having a plan around it and you
know how we wanted to go about things
it's not just the batting group that's a
concern though
oh that's nasty reports in the indian
media suggest muhammad sharmi's arm was
broken when struck by pat cummins
delivery
and he'll miss the rest of the series
cricket australia has played a straight
bat to suggestions the sydney test match
could be moved because of the growing
covert cluster there
saying there's time to assess the
evolving health situation
and the preference remains to play the
third test at the scg
neil cross abc news adelaide
on the satellite a monsoon trough and
developing low over the northern tropics
are generating heavy rain
storms and gusty winds another trough
stretching from the wa interior to
northeast new south wales is triggering
showers and storms
and a hot air mass is spreading over wa
and queensland
looking around the country tomorrow a
wet day for queensland with showers in
the west
late showers in the southeast and
clearing showers in the northeast
in new south wales and the act showers
and storms in the east
late showers elsewhere a wet day in
victoria as well with the showers
increasing in the southwest
late showers in the east in tasmania
mostly sunny in the northwest
late showers for the south and showers
in the northeast
showers for south australia's southeast
and north clearing showers in the
central parts and mostly sunny in the
west
a mostly sunny day in wa with the
exception of rain and storms
in the northeast and in the northern
territory
showers and storms for the north and
over the interior and heavy rain in the
south
looking ahead to tuesday's forecast for
the capital cities early showers for
sydney
showers for melbourne canberra and
hobart a sunny day in perth
possible shower for brisbane partly
cloudy in adelaide and
showers and a possible storm for darwin
with the top of 31.
and that is the latest from abc news i'm
gemma verness
and stay with us the brief is up next
[Music]
[Applause]
this week on news breakfast we'll count
down to christmas with one of
australia's favorite actors
william mcginnis who's just released a
surprising new book about the festive
season and
how to look after those furry bundles of
joy we'll talk all things pets with the
rspca
don't miss it
they're swapping the classroom for the
pressure cooker there's only going to be
one winner tonight it's not going to be
like at school where everyone gets a
ribbon
but will it be tom that's left feeling
the heat
you're probably thinking what's smoke
mean it's pretty much the definition of
utah
hard quiz kid special wednesday 7 30 on
abc and ivu
it's been a year like no other
unprecedented unimaginable
unfathomable there's only one way to
look back on the year that was
20 bloody 20k
wednesday at 8 on abc in eye view
[Applause]
9 8 this new year's eve the parties at
yours
stay home with the abc for the biggest
night of the year
at 8 30 join rove for
and at nine charlie pickering and zan
rowe bring you australia's biggest stars
there's only one place to be this new
year's eve that's your place with the
abc
from 8 30 on abc and iview
hit me all right
i just let a magician interact with me
brilliant tonight
wait a second now this is getting crazy
now
are you from another planet yeah you are
full of surprises
so crazy don't you love it i am having a
great time
abc tv plus starts january 1.
[Applause]
[Music]
so brett this is studio 12 parliament
house
press gallery a place that's seen a lot
of interesting stuff happen
it's witnessed it but it's in a building
that's also
seen some astonishing things this year
we get to see a lot of things being in
this place and that's the whole idea of
the brief to give people
a sense of this place the decisions that
are made here and why that matters to
their real lives wherever
they live but when we started the brief
we had no idea what we were getting
ourselves into this year
that's right we thought that 2020 was
going to be another
run-of-the-mill year and this was a
program that was going to take you
behind
the scenes that we're all familiar with
but what happened in 2020 was not
familiar to any of us
and consequently this parliament saw
some astonishing decisions being made
both
economically and of health front they
have the fact that we had
so many shops shuttered the borders
closed
a nation that has been the great migrant
nation
closed its borders they're still closed
to a large degree
just amazing stuff we saw the formation
of the national cabinet a wartime
idea where you're bringing together the
premiers the chief ministers and the
prime minister
to meet together to discuss the country
which was in crisis
people were out of work unemployment
doubled and this building
was making all those decisions but was
disconnected because even the public
couldn't come in
decisions made here were on a sometimes
hourly basis and the measure of how
enormous it's been
on a news front is that one day alone
the government spent something like 130
billion dollars in economic supports but
that wasn't the main headline
the main headline that day was that the
economy was going to be put into
deliberate hibernation to save us from
this invisible threat
so the brief we're taking a look back on
on the year that was
and going right back to the start of the
parliamentary year it was january
rolling into february canberra had been
blanketed in smoke
and was a prime minister under pressure
for a holiday that's right
and start it was hawaii it was bushfires
and of course
them sports rules minister on the ropes
over a pork barrelling scandal
a prime minister still struggling to
recover after mishandling the bushfire
disaster
and now a dramatic step to halt the
spread of a deadly virus
it's a new year and a new political
landscape
well welcome to the first day of
parliament for the year well there is
turmoil in the nationals ranks this
morning with the former deputy prime
minister barnaby joyce
set to challenge michael mccormack for
the party's top job who knows where this
day is going to end
we are standing by for a result from
that party room meeting
michael mccormack first nationals leader
to be challenged in more than 30 years
this is a very rare event
and what a
the leader's position was won by mr
michael mccormack and uh the deputy
leader david little proud how pleased
are you that your deputy is now david a
little proud
he's good man he's a good there he is
thankfully i said he's a good man how
are you mate you're good
bit of a tough week for you not really
um we were close we know where we are
i believe that we're within one vote
possibly two barnaby joyce
he didn't have the numbers to take back
his old job but he does have the numbers
to cause
plenty of trouble for the bloke he tried
to topple michael mccormack
and the prime minister
[Music]
i think we all knew we'd start the week
and probably lose bridget mckenzie
but the loss of matt canavan gives you
an indication of how unpredictable
i think this start to the parliamentary
year has been yeah the landscape
just shifted with these cracks emerging
from left
right center it was quite amazing never
never before has there been such an
important time for the national party
at the nationals like it's just it was
all just falling apart
what months earlier had won all their
seats that kept
the house in order to survive an
election and then
by the mere months later you have two
cabinet ministers gone
just from their own handlings the fact
that michael mccormack has had to say
that he's
he's had a showdown on leadership three
times the past
18 months or so they're bored well
bored or just going through some sort of
existential
[Music]
oh it's a crisis wacky first week wasn't
it
so how long have you been in canberra um
six days
and what do you think of it what do you
think about parliament house as a place
it's so
weird hey it's like a clubhouse right
like everyone comes
to the club for a week and there's like
a lunch place a place where you get your
coffee
just wanting to ask about melbourne
oh my god what a crowd now what do you
think about the way that the
extreme weather over the last couple of
months have affected
federal politics in this place i get the
sense
and from who i've spoken to as well that
everyone left
for the summer with a sense that the
government was very much on top of
things
and we've come back with kind of a
different vibe the
election seems a long way away now you
know when there was such that
outpouring of support for scott morrison
scott morrison has started the year in
much deeper political trouble than most
of his recent predecessors
against a backdrop of the unresolved
sports road scandal
and a summer of catastrophic fires to
the bushfire emergency is being
discussed today
so many people i've lost their homes
now you're an idiot you really are
scott morrison was confronted by angry
residents while visiting the burned-out
town of cabargo
people are angry and people are angry
with you people are upset
well whether they're angry with me or
they're angry about this situation
all i know is that they're hurting
do you think that climate stuff is
changing though do you think that the
prime minister's going to be forced into
a
a change to his approach to climate
change well we've already seen reports
that he's going to
that the australia will change its
target heading into 2050
so i think it's already starting to
emerge i reckon it's a vibe isn't it
the vibe of the summer i was going to
say that but i didn't think it was uh
yeah yeah okay well i think it's the
five but i think i'm wrecking i think
it's pretty similar to
um the early 2000s when australia was
going through the millennium drought
and canberra was just this baking dry
horrible place water restrictions left
right and center
and suddenly climate change became
something that was tangible
and it's i think it's something similar
has happened over summer where you've
had the bushfires you've had
really definitely it feels like
everybody has a connection to somebody
that was either affected by the fires or
one of the flow-on effects from
the fires it's become so much more
commonplace
and even the drought in the lead-up to
christmas it still seemed a real
regional issue but it feels like the
bush fires have sort of
um bridged that divide maybe this
thing's had quite an outing
in you're talking about this thing well
this is pretty amazing
there's a new scandal engulfing the
government this time
over alleged misuse of taxpayers 100
million
of sports grants in the lead up to the
election last year were affected
the sheer scale of political
interference revealed in these bumper
color-coded documents show the process
was rigged from the start will you
apologize for your handling of this
grants program
not at all this was a hugely successful
program a fresh turn tonight in the
sports wrote scandal with revelations
minister bridget mckenzie
handed her own gun club almost 40 000
in taxpayers cash well yesterday i
resigned my ministry
i think we can expect more focus on
grants regional grants community grants
in the
weeks ahead
[Applause]
thanks everyone i declare open this
hearing of the select committee on
administration of sports grants
i was here last night when ordered a
general thing was happening and he was
trying to explain you know
what was eligible and what wasn't
eligible and it was
so confusing and my head almost exploded
but i think we landed on the fact that
there were those
projects that were they might have been
eligible at one point
but they became ineligible before the
money actually changed hand so you know
they'd started work or something
and so the government's still saying
well the projects that we assessed
that were assessed were assessed as
eligible
but then clearly some were ineligible by
the time they got money so whose fault
is that
you don't see something like this often
in politics
um wherever you are just the the inner
workings of government
literally literally in technicolor look
at that
but now that's what's so embarrassing
about it this this i think was the most
problematic thing for
bridget mckenzie but there's nothing
there's nothing wrong with that the
government would say they're saying that
she only lost her job because she didn't
declare
a gun membership to which got one of the
smaller grants that they're
they seemed quite comfortable with well
they do say that it was just it was
almost on the technicality that she fell
but not for this when in fact
i think she was cooked when this this
emerged because it just shows you how
uh it shows you how the sausage works
and like any sausage maker
will tell you it's actually not pretty
love to see it you bring the rain you
are the rain man
we're standing by for what is a very
significant event here at parliament
house and that is the
indonesian president joko widodo
addressing the australian parliament
a friend in need is a friend
indeed and he kind of came bearing a
gift of sorts and that is that
the free trade agreement is set to
proceed now yes
and it was only last minute that the
indonesian parliament actually approved
that they had to give their ascent to
it the flight carrying 270 australians
has just left the coronavirus epicenter
of wuhan
and you survived this period and so
you've got a government that
you know in april last year was
trumpeting its budget it was in black
they're back in black
they're they're banked in they've said
it umpteen times haven't they since
they're saying that they are black back
in black
and now you've got a coronavirus that's
hitting tourism and travel you've got a
drought it's still going on you've got
bushfires that you're recovering from
that back in black's surely looking a
bit uh global slow down
anyway well scomo's had one miracle
it would be probably a second miracle if
they do hit that surplus but everything
seems to be
now hanging
um maybe bishop freidenberg can do
something on that front but
seriously like how are they going to do
it in some ways it would almost be a bad
look if you still got to surplus
with all these massive problems and it
would be right how do you sell that
to to joe public if you've got money in
the bank when people are
going out the back door on the phones
yeah
and that and that is it actually does
become a problem you want to have
almost empty the cupboard to try and
protect australia the economy
communities from this hurt some breaking
news richard de natale the
greens leader will be standing down from
the leadership of the party he says he
wants to be spending
more time with his family so in the
middle of the gnats trying to
unsuccessfully turf out a leader we saw
the
the greens decide to have a change the
digital natalie's calling it a day he'll
leave the parliament later in the year
they're a bit more streamlined weren't
they with their approach well that's how
to run a coup
isn't it where you basically announce it
after it's happened not that it wasn't
but it was interesting that they
actually told us it was happening this
time last time they all just went into a
room and suddenly they pop out and say
christine milne is leaving richard d
natalie's the new leader
this time there was an actual vote you
know for
a party that's always decrying the
quality of democracy
it's quite remarkable how much we don't
know about their form of democracy
who votes can't ever get into the greens
conferences or used to not be able to
so it is it's quite interesting look and
ironically
it was the fall or the the retirement
effectively
of the man who wanted to mainstream the
party
[Music]
if you started the parliamentary
fortnight talking about fires
you end it with torrential rain that's
pouring in parts of the country
you know the government's got a whole
lot to do there's a drought going on out
there it's not going to be a quiet year
for them
in any way i'm a bit exhausted
well i'm wondering what the horsemen of
the apocalypse are going to bring
on this parliament because we have we
have we had pestilence yet but we've had
droughts
[Music]
when the politicians returned for their
second sitting fortnight they all flew
in the journalists were there waiting
for them to travel closely to brett in
those days and synadesmas was about to
get underway it's that wonderful
tradition where government ministers get
grilled
so things like sports wroughts were
still coming up
but the politics that we knew were
starting to change a little
yeah politics looked like it was normal
but this is the inflection point of the
year this is where
everything as we knew it was suddenly
going to change
there was this new fellow on the scene
someone called brendan murphy we're all
familiar with him now but then
he was a chief medical officer that no
one knew we had
and yet here he was front and center in
federal politics because
this man was critical to the nation's
health
[Music]
hello and welcome to parliament house in
canberra where it appears it's back to
the future on the climate front
politicians are once again firing shots
and then tiresome climate wars
hello mr dowd how are we going labor's
talking about zero net emissions by 2050
what do you make of that i've never had
so much [__] in my life
yeah you're gonna hit guys politicians
come down the escalator and we chase
after them there's a pack of us here
we tend to be a bit like dogs pack
animals yapping a little bit at them
talk about technology there what about
nuclear do you think that has a big role
to play
the sitting fortnite obviously kicking
off a lot of talk about emissions
anthony albanese the opposition leader
who said that labour will have a policy
of
zero net emissions by 2050 the
government's saying oh well at what cost
so i imagine we'll be hearing a little
bit more about that as we go into
this next two weeks
anthony albanese's plan for australia to
reach zero greenhouse gas emissions by
will dominate discussions as parliament
returns today he's getting a coffee
no no no no no no no well if you were in
any doubt about the state of the debate
look no further than a corridor
confrontation this morning
the member for hunter is going about to
lose his job what an
absolute load of peg manure he's going
to reach out to you
he's going to reach out to the coal mine
don't worry fellas we're reaching out to
you
it was pretty embarrassing all around
some of the exchanges
parliament's back for another sitting
fortnight and now we've got some policy
that's being debated the coalitions come
with a spring in its step because
finally it's got its favorite talking
point
labor energy and climate and it's having
a feral whack right from the start
which is kind of interesting anthony
albanese has taken a grand risk at the
start of a year when we were told
that it wasn't going to be for ages that
we were going to get some meat on the
bones when it comes to policy
right so labor has reaffirmed this
policy that they took to the last
election which is
achieving net zero emissions by 2050 but
there's not a lot of detail as to how
they're actually going to get there they
say they need to take the time to talk
to industry but
it has left them vulnerable to the
government's attack
those opposite can't agree mr speaker
and what they want to do on 2030. so we
have the coalition
saying that they want to achieve
emissions reduction through
uh technology we've got the labour party
saying we want to achieve
net zero by 2050 but they're not saying
how they're going to do it so if they
merge the two we might have a coherent
policy
so what do we think the labour would
have learned from this 2050 goal
and how will that shape what it's going
to do for 2030 between now and the next
week well i think that
the heart of the gamblers they think
that the community is prepared to pay a
bit more
given what we've seen with the drought
the bushfires
because you know climate is the issue
that's been
at the heart of some of these arguments
over this long hot summer
this evening in the parliament we gather
on this balcony
to mourn and provide solace strength and
love
to hannah clark and her children her
family and friends
the light will fade soon here on this
terrace
we need to make sure that their memory
doesn't i call the prime minister
on indulgence thank you mr speaker yeah
the prime minister
said there must be lessons on tackling
domestic
violence learned from the four deaths at
the hands of this estranged husband and
father rowan baxter
murder it's what it is
murder that again
last thursday shocked our country
it was a really emotional moment in the
parliament uh
and i think incredibly significant that
it was addressed in our national
parliament like this
as a mark of respect i ask all prisons
to rise in their places
let's get more now on those revelations
that the country's top intelligence
agency has uncovered a sleeper agent who
ran a major spy ring for years
so this is pretty unusual for asio to
open its doors not just to the
intelligence community but to the media
as well
and of course it would be remiss of me
not to acknowledge and welcome members
of the media
you're not our average crowd how many
work events do you go to where you have
to give your full name
including your middle name which i now
know your birth date and actually the
place
where you were born you usually just
rock up yeah but i thought a place like
asio like
why do they need this information they
need to do they already know it
well i'm sure there's a file on you and
i now if there wasn't already beforehand
i should talk about what azo's first
tweet will be no comment
mike burgess is a natural showman
right he has got that kind of theater
craft that you don't usually have
the speech was mostly about explaining
what they did
but also what they need to do and the
threats that australia is facing that's
right
the boss of asia also declared neo-nazis
are emerging
as one of this country's most
challenging security threats
the country's premier cyber intelligence
agency could soon be enlisted
to help track down pedophiles terrorists
and other serious criminals operating
online
the abc can reveal the federal
government planners in advanced stages
and would for the first time allow the
cyber spies to target suspects
here at home and it is that delicate
tight rope of giving the agencies what
they need but not getting to that point
of mass surveillance and
i think that's why the intelligence and
security agencies are the one
that are pushing this message now not
the politicians because it's showing
people the reality yeah they're trying
to build the case huh yeah exactly
one of the complications steph of course
is that we've heard
about the expansion of these powers from
isd
into australia and this happened this
actually emerged some time ago about 18
months ago
and since then the journalists who
actually had a story
that pointed out this change of
circumstance the change of the landscape
when it comes to the internet
intelligence services
her house got raided now that has
actually done
their cause a lot of damage so we're
seeing them
prosecuting a case that they perhaps
didn't think in a way
that they perhaps didn't think they
would have to
the financial fallout from the
coronavirus is becoming clearer
more than 80 billion has been wiped off
australian stocks over the past two days
and has said the treasury is still
modeling the full effects of the virus
but the message
was not positive for the federal
australian budget
well the surplus is a test that they set
for themselves and it remains to be seen
whether they will meet that test he
produced ads with back in black
the liberal party even released back in
black coffee cups
are you embarrassed by that hubris we're
back in balance and no one can ever take
that away from us
we need to prepare ourselves for that
budget not being in surplus and the
realities of
this virus and the other impacts on the
budget is that the message well
i'm not drawing any conclusions at this
point mark how does this not become
a global pandemic now one of the things
i've learned about this virus is it's
very hard to predict
anything other than we're making a daily
evaluation of the fact
many issues on the table today and i
welcome of course the chief medical
officer
professor brendan murphy so brandon you
might be the only
chief medical officer who's ever had a
profile you might be the only cmo
australians have ever known perhaps i've
had a more
profile than others and it is it is
troubling when i go walking around lake
burley griffin and
i have to wear a cap and sunglasses to
stop being recognised but
it's true it is the profile has been uh
unexpected um and
it's both just come with the nature of
what's what's been happening
remember foolishly saying well i've done
three years of the cmo not one public
health crisis
and within weeks
well that could be could be andrew so
we're getting these sort of
daily press conferences updates about
how the government's
responding to the coronavirus outbreak
what sort of plans they're putting in
place
it seems like the the rhetoric the the
way in which the government's acting
about coronavirus is ramping up a little
bit
my priority is to keep australians safe
australia has activated an emergency
plan to deal with the outbreak of the
coronavirus
you may have seen some of the empty
shelves down at your local supermarket
with australians panic buying and
stockpiling rolls and rolls of toilet
paper
every day before question time we see
brendan murphy the chief medical officer
usually with greg hunt the health
minister and sometimes the prime
minister scott morrison
in giving an update on the coronavirus
it's clear that this is something the
government wants to own and keep the
attention on coronavirus rather than any
political issue that it might have on
other fronts
yeah look when i moved to canberra to be
a political reporter i didn't think one
of the main issues we'd be tackling was
the great toilet paper crisis of 2020
but i can understand why people are
nervous the coverage has been relentless
and i think the government is really
trying to
get out in front of this and make sure
they're providing as much information
but also
people have just been through this
horror bushfire season you know that
that was an unprecedented
prime minister exactly and i think that
the the way that he wants to react to
the corona virus is
almost to make up the missteps of his
handling of the bushfire
crisis and now there's even talk of a
possible recession
all eyes are on the federal government
for when it will announce some form of
stimulus
for the economy this is a really
enormous economic challenge
the surplus is basically down the toilet
um but worse than that
we're now looking at the r word
recession
this is this is the dual challenge are
we heading for a recession
the impact right across the economy has
been so great right it sort of started
as something that was
affecting the education sector and
tourism businesses but now we've got
supply chain issues we've potentially
got major
pressures on health systems on aged care
and
there's still a lot of uncertainty we
don't know how much worse this might
still become and how long it might drag
on
but when you've got josh freidenberg
talking about the b word
not the r word the b word billions not
millions but what he will spend
then you know it's dead serious because
as soon as he starts
spending billions surplus out the window
and labor won't remind them of that at
all
labour won't be mentioning that there
was a promise of course not
of course they will
i want to pick up on something else
that's been happening in estimates today
and that is further questioning about
these sports raw
this is an issue that is not going away
it is being pursued in
senate committees and senate inquiries
estimates
this week is known as estimates week
it's when senators
ask questions to ministers and
bureaucrats
all day they start at 9am in the morning
and they go to
very late at night there's 34 measures
announced by government i can step two
what's no no no
no no right now not much is happening
estimates can be
incredibly boring but we always have to
monitor it because sometimes
really interesting things can happen
they can really yield really interesting
stories i have a series of questions
about the
sports roots affair the second week of
the sitting fortnite it's all about
senate estimates it's a government's
nightmare and sports rules of course has
come up now
you remember the last sitting fortnight
bridget mckenzie was the front bencher
who quit
because she was the sports minister
who'd signed off on all these projects
it was the pre-election cash splash of
putting money into sporting clubs that
the auditor found they were biased
towards marginal seats that the
government wanted to win
throughout the estimates though labor
were keen to find out what was going on
though
in those days before the election and
who was signing off on this stuff some
of the things we found out
like past fortnight was that there were
136 emails that were bouncing between
the prime minister's office and bridget
mckenzie's office
that revelation of these emails bouncing
around drew him
further and further into this scandal
mars question about the sports
presidency
well i'm going to focus on coronavirus
the prime minister hasn't really wanted
to answer questions about this i think
he was asked a question at a press
conference this week and he said
you know i think ordinary australians
are much more concerned about
coronavirus
but this won't go away we've had senate
estimates but there's also
the separate senate inquiry that is
looking into this but as the politicians
leave after this sitting fortnight and
the committee's end
this story continues and that is what
sports grants program has become
it's no longer just about sports grants
there's another virus now that's
attacking the government and that is
questions of integrity
[Music]
this week on news breakfast we'll count
down to christmas with one of
australia's favorite actors
william mcginnis who's just released a
surprising new book
about the festive season and how to look
after those furry bundles of joy we'll
talk
all things pets with the rspca don't
miss it
[Music]
[Applause]
what do you know about what i want to
achieve
[Music]
grandstand summer of cricket continues
live and ad-free
as australia face-off against fierce
rivals india
every test all the rivalry called live
at the grounds
grandstand summer of cricket live on abc
radio and the abc listen app
a summer of entertainment awaits on abc
eye view
anywhere anytime
your summertime streaming is on abc eye
view
watch abc news live stream anywhere
anytime
on abc iview keep up to date with the
latest breaking stories from around the
corner
and across the globe and you can catch
up on all your favorite abc
news and current affairs programs head
to abc iview and live stream
abc news now there really is a
quite serious situation that we're
worried about get the latest information
and updates from every region in one
place
conditions have esparta authorities
remain on alert
head to the abc emergency website and
stay connected
tonight restrictions return for greater
sydney as the northern beaches cluster
grows and states and territories slam
the door shut on their borders
uk prime minister boris johnson forces
millions into lockdown over christmas
as infections keep climbing and the
tasmanian town
coming to life after losing its major
employer
[Music]
hello and welcome to abc news i'm gemma
vanessa
sydney has recorded 30 new coronavirus
cases
all bar 2 are linked to the outbreak on
the northern beaches
states and territories have moved
quickly to protect their residents
introducing new rules to stop the spread
of the virus
covered restrictions are back for the
greater sydney region
including caps on the number of people
allowed to visit homes
ashley raper begins our coverage life on
the northern beaches
is officially on hold the peninsula is
24 hours into its lockdown
as the rest of sydney watches and waits
i think it's the right thing to do and
hopefully we can nip it in the bud
before it gets really big
yeah it's pretty tough especially with
the weather
because we've got quite a small house
we're kind of locked up inside there
have been 30 new locally acquired cases
in new south wales 28 are connected to
the avalon cluster
taking it to 68 in total the source of
the other two cases
isn't known but both are on the northern
beaches
the one positive is we still have not
seen
evidence of massive seeding outside of
the northern beaches community
just how the virus traveled to the
northern beaches remains a mystery
whilst i really do want to find the
source
it may be that this is going to be a
challenge beyond us
but to be perfectly frank our focus now
is also
um just as avid on trying to lock down
this
and control this cluster the prime
minister sent a message of support
while on leave everyone's working
together we're working the problem
to get on top of it to ensure that we
can return to as
as normal a covered situation as we can
as those
outside of the northern beaches
responded to calls for testing
the government also announced greater
sydney and the central coast
will again be subjected to tighter
restrictions
from midnight tonight until midnight on
wednesday there can only be ten visitors
in a home
the one person per four square meter
rule will be reinstated at all indoor
places
there'll also be a limit of 300 people
at hospitality venues and places of
worship
dancing is again banned so too is
singing and chanting
i've just got to say for the moment it's
probably one of the most dangerous
exercises you can do dancing
and singing the government also wants
everybody to wear masks
limit outings and stay in sydney it's
also urging people not to visit
relatives in aged care homes
but these are all advised not mandatory
there are hard new rules though on
people from greater sydney
entering south australia the northern
territory
the australian capital territory
queensland and victoria
the borders are closing it's appropriate
that we take these steps rather than
waiting for new south wales to have a
different set of rules in place i can't
control what they
what they do i can only control our
border so
it's a time of increasing uncertainty
here in sydney
and it's likely we won't know until
wednesday what we can or can't do
on christmas day for people on the
northern beaches
the case numbers will be watched closely
and then for the rest of the city
it's going to come down to whether more
cases pop up
outside of the peninsula ashley raper
abc news sydney sydney's northern
beaches residents
are being praised for adhering to
regulations during the first 24 hours of
the official lockdown
it's due to end at midnight on wednesday
but authorities have warned it could be
extended as cases grow
residents have been bunkering down
preparing for a very
2020 kind of christmas tim swanston
reports
santa face masks hand sanitizer
toilet paper the halls are decked but
the covid grinch has stolen
karen kyle's family christmas we'll just
be home just the two of us because
my husband unfortunately is a contact
close contact in it appears to be two
venues now the best she can do is a
virtual get together
today a dry run well not completely dry
of lots of different types and bottles
of
wine i'm really glad that everybody here
is
taking it as seriously as it needs to be
it looks like it's going to be a merry
little christmas for andy green i've got
some games to catch up on i've got some
netflix i've got a big book
and i've got some christmas presents
that i'm being used
his family's in queensland as a northern
beaches resident
he's locked out i've just kind of got to
suck it up really
it's it's worth having one christmas off
to make sure that we're safe silent
nights and days are helping contain the
virus
but not sparking joy in local businesses
just leading up to christmas we're
packed normally um this time of year we
need to be busy because it helps us get
through the winter
it was starting to ramp up there for a
while
and then it's just slowed right down the
ghost of lockdown's past
exercise one of the few escapes
just coming out to get exercise and from
what i've seen everyone's pretty much
staying home which is a good thing
we just want to see the back of this so
if we can play our part then let's do it
day one of the official lockdown
residents hope will be over by
christmas tim swanston abc news sydney
the situation on the borders is changing
rapidly late this afternoon the act
declared greater sydney a hot spot
everyone traveling to
canberra from sydney will have to
quarantine from midnight tonight
the northern territory also made a late
change warning passengers who were
already in the air this afternoon
they could return to sydney for free or
enter two weeks quarantine on arrival
gene kennedy explains the new border
rules
coronavirus travel restrictions are back
victoria will ban travellers from
greater sydney and the central coast
from midnight to night those who do head
south will require
14 days of hotel quarantine it's
declared the northern beach is a hot
zone
saying no one from that area can cross
the border
you must stay in your state to keep
victorians safe and to play your part in
a national
covert 19 policy response
victorians who have been in greater
sydney have extra time to make it home
they'll still need to quarantine but can
do it at home
if they arrive by midnight monday those
living in border communities can still
travel within the border bubble
with driver's license checks the rest of
new south wales remains green
and travels south of the border is
allowed with a permit
queensland has announced similar
restrictions
asking travellers from greater sydney
not to come north
after 1am tomorrow we love you we want
you to have
a peaceful christmas at home and
hopefully
in the months to come i will be able to
welcome
welcome you back people from the
sunshine state
have until tuesday to get home without
quarantining
but they will be tested on arrival south
australia
has also banned arrivals from the
northern beaches anyone from greater
sydney arriving after midnight
will have to complete two weeks of hotel
quarantine
i think we can feel you know quietly
positive about
what is happening in new south wales but
we do need to put things in place to
make sure
that south australia remains safe
wa has a hard border in place with new
south wales
as of midnight last night what would be
awful
is if the virus came into western
australia and we had to shut down parts
of the state for christmas
tasmania has also banned those from the
northern beaches
all together but those from across
greater sydney are allowed
as long as they go into quarantine for a
fortnight
the northern territory has declared
greater sydney the blue mountains
illawarra
and the central coast hot spots anyone
arriving from those locations will need
to foot
the two-week quarantine bill
from midnight no one will be permitted
to travel to victoria from sydney or the
central coast
and border communities are preparing for
the reintroduction of checkpoints
along the murray river margaret paul
reports
a hard decision to put up a hard border
we can't have people from the greater
sydney area coming to melbourne coming
to victoria
that's an unacceptable risk and that's
why the border will be closed
a hard border shut from midnight tonight
these passengers were on the last
35 planes out of sydney today around
3400 passengers
and we will meet them and ensure again
that they have the right permit and
rights to be here
they're being tested but it wasn't
mandatory it just seems a bit absurd
given
what victoria has gone through and what
you know everyone down here has gone
through
um you know to to to give people that
option
that option ends tonight from midnight
all of sydney and the central coast is
being designated a red zone
meaning all travel from this area is
banned
if you come here from greater sydney you
will hotel quarantine for 14 days
the victorian taxpayer will foot the
bill for those coming to victoria by
road 700 police officers will be
patrolling
and checking a hard border and there's a
request for up to 300 adf
personnel people on the border aren't
happy not again
was probably the first feeling it would
have gone through everybody's heads on
either side
of the river how does it feel getting
something jammed fair where it fits
residents along the border won't need a
permit if they can show their driver's
license
permits will be granted for travel from
the rest of new south wales
for now i wouldn't recommend people
traveling into new south wales you don't
know the circumstances that you might be
caught in
whether it's in regional new south wales
or in sydney it's the missing links in
the chain of transmission in the sydney
cluster that has victorian authorities
concerned
and they're not confident the situation
is safe
without mandatory mask wearing and stay
at home orders across sydney
i'm not going to wait around while they
add to their rules we are going to
protect what we have built
business groups support the new rules
victoria cannot have a third wave
it would destroy many many businesses so
we think the action taken by the state
government today
to keep victoria safe is appropriate as
victorians
scramble to get home tonight or risk
christmas in quarantine
a car bomb has killed at least eight
people including women
and children in the afghan capital kabul
more than 15 others have been wounded
a member of the afghan parliament
amongst them there are fears the toll
could rise
rapidly in coming days no one has
claimed responsibility for the attack
it's the latest in a string of targeted
blasts in the country
families in london and southeastern
england have had their christmas plans
thwarted
because the british prime minister
changed his mind and brought in severe
restrictions
the number of infections in the uk is
soaring reaching up to 35 000 cases a
day
the sudden rise is believed to be driven
by a new variant of the virus
from london europe correspondent nick
dole reports
just days out from christmas a decision
to severely limit the festive cheer
it is with a very heavy heart i must
tell you we cannot continue
with christmas as planned london and
south east england were already under
the highest lockdown measures under a
three-tier system
but health authorities say they're
seeing a new more transmissible variant
of the virus
and they've created a new level of
restrictions in response
in england those living in tier 4 areas
should not mix
with anyone outside their own household
at christmas
the new variant is raising fears that
health services won't be able to cope
nearly 90 of hospital beds in england
are currently full
it is moving very quickly through the
community i suspect it will
become the dominant strain over the next
several months
the fisa vaccine has already been given
to 350 000 people across the uk
the government says it should be
effective against the new strain
probably but it is a probably with a
capital p
these new vaccines are effectively like
emails that we send to the immune system
and they're editable the prime minister
said the new variant's
speed of transmission meant he had no
choice but to act
just days ago boris johnson said it
would be inhuman to cancel christmas
kind of upset about it but what can we
do we will lose out but
at the end of the as i said epic will
help us
we've got to do it but for leslie nelson
the decision has far
greater consequences just seems so
unfair
for somebody like me i'm terminally ill
i won't be here next christmas my
sister's going to be sitting at home by
herself
100 miles away and her presence is under
the tree
many people's hopes have a happy ending
to a very tough year
have now been dashed nick dole abc news
[Music]
in london the southside flyers have
capped off a dominant wnbl season by
beating hometown favorites the
townsville fire
99 points to 82 in the grand final
it was an even contest until the flyers
gained control in the second half icing
the aim to claim their first
championship in eight years
tropical townsville the culmination of a
whirlwind
season more than 50 games in six weeks
as the home crowd got behind its side
and it was the underdogs who started
with more intense
about two seconds southside's liz
cambage was in foul trouble early
but the flyers hit back
says get that out of here to level the
score at quarter time
the physicality continued in the second
although the flyers leilani mitchell is
given too much space
she is landing the team's traded threes
and the lead townsville's teenage star
shyla hill
showing her desperation mitchell's
dominance handed her side a two-point
lead at the main break
hey mitchell she is smokey shot feels
good but our defense is just absolutely
atrocious right now so we need to square
that up and make some adjustments
halftime
cambage returned after just three
minutes of court time in the first half
but fouled again the fire started to
lose a grip
as the flyers took a hole
an animated cambash pushing the margin
out to 10 at the final break
the opel star fouled and was sidelined
again
but her teammates stepped up
and the buffer got bigger it started to
unravel for the fire
another beckhole basket icing the game
and then it was party time the flyers
are showing why
they were the favorites the wnbl
championship
is headed back to melbourne's south side
the emotions
spilled over after a tough season in the
north queensland hub
this has been the biggest grind of the
basketball season i've ever felt
it's it's just released you know
we did it we did it mitchell was awarded
best player with 31 points
the flyers victory ends an eight-year
championship drought
tom maddox abc news
joe burns has been cleared of any
serious damage after he was hit by a
bouncer in australia's demolition of
india
in the first test at the adelaide oval
and while the tourists are desperate to
recover
there are signs they will lose a key
placement to injury
before the boxing day test at the mcg
under pressure and under fire joe burns
copped this
it's nasty with his position in the side
clearly in doubt burns needed runs and
so after treatment
faced the attack again and eventually
came out on top
joe burns gets to 15 and australia
win by eight wickets great quarter
um you know keep him in the in the side
um
so happy for him today scans of his
elbow have cleared burns of serious
damage
and australia's batting could also be
bolstered for the second test with the
return of david warner from a groin
strain
suffered in the one day series the
indians plight appears far worse
their premier batsman captain virat
khali will miss the rest of the series
as he returns home for the birth of his
first child but he believes india can
get off the canvas for the boxing day
bout at the mcg
i'm very very confident that we'll
bounce back strongly in the next one
kohli admits producing india's lowest
ever test score was poor
but insists the collapse has to be put
in perspective
they bought similar lengths in the first
innings as well and
we were just better in terms of handling
it and having a plan around it and you
know how we wanted to go about things
it's not just the batting group that's a
concern though
oh that's nasty reports in the indian
media suggest muhammad sharmi's arm was
broken when struck by pat cummin's
delivery
and he'll miss the rest of the series
cricket australia has played a straight
bat to suggestions the sydney test match
could be moved because of the growing
covert cluster there
saying there's time to assess the
evolving health situation
and the preference remains to play the
third test at the scg
neil cross abc news adelaide
in afl richmond player sydney stack has
been refused bail
as he faces charges for breach in
quarantine in western australia
stack flew from melbourne to perth via
south australia on december 10 for his
grandfather's funeral
at that time travellers from south
australia who were allowed into wa
were required to self-quarantine for 14
days
despite being issued a direction to do
so stack was found in the entertainment
district of northbridge
early on saturday morning the 20 year
old is already serving a
10-game suspension after being sent home
from queensland in september
for breaching the afl's hub arrangements
he will appear in court in perth again
tomorrow
some of australia's olympic hopefuls may
feel like they've missed their shot at a
middle with the postponement of the
tokyo games
but the nation's top shooters are
keeping the competitive spirit
and their dreams alive through video
conferencing
the coronavirus pandemic has created
moving targets for sports
all year now some of the country's best
athletes have found their range
with their eyes firmly on the target of
the tokyo olympics
in 2021 and it starts now commonwealth
games 10 meter air rifle champion dane
sampson
says the pandemic has made preparation
difficult
athletes usually spend up to four months
each year competing overseas
but travel restrictions have seen those
plans scrapped
it just feels like training training
training training training without an
end
and that can be quite mundane it can be
quite taxing on
yourself mentally particularly but the
competitive spirit has been revived in
the most
20 20 of ways an international
competition
over video conference athletes from
seven countries
including iran bangladesh and singapore
go
shot for shot against each other at the
same time
challengers watch each other's
performances and scores
in real time from across the globe this
is trying to provide this similar
environment to what we would have at an
international event when we have
a lot of high profile athletes
the environment is a lot more stressful
in a good way
after qualifying for her first olympic
team 19 year old katarina copela's
preparation has been anything but normal
this year
it felt pretty surreal the fact that we
were able to compete against another
another country again being able to see
other people shoot
see their scores and have something to
strive for felt pretty good
i think it's pretty essential for our
development towards 2021
doing things a little differently with
the dream once again
in sight patrick martin abc news
adelaide
queenstown on tasmania's west coast is
still coming to terms with losing its
major mining employer
the town is seeing an exodus of
residents while local sporting and
community clubs are struggling to keep
their doors open
but there are some signs the community
spirit will stay alive
as a new wave of residents move in
in its heyday the queenstown golf club
was the place to be
today it's a step back in time loved by
those
who never left people came from
all over australia to play it out
in our open tournaments the club has
been in decline since the closure of the
mount lyell mining and railway company
in the 90s
the town's copper mine shut down again
in 2014
after the deaths of three workers in two
separate incidents
with the regular local golfers getting
on the club is at risk of shutting its
doors
the demographic that was actively
working
and seeking work had to move away
in order to to survive which took out
a whole two generations in fact of
people
that would have naturally just follow
along and taken over
at the local rsl it's the ladies who
keep the money rolling in
over the bar behind every man is a good
woman they say
but it's getting harder to pay the bills
the local footy club isn't immune either
covert has stopped its cash flow and
volunteers
are hard to find you can't expect young
ones to stay and just play football
just to keep the football club alive
it's not going to happen
for several years now towns on the west
coast have struggled with their
declining population
but it only takes a quick walk around
town to notice all the sold
signs people are buying up here in
queenstown
and while it's still too early to tell
whether it will reverse the town's
population drain
it's certainly reshaping the area
until recently terry young's dream of
home ownership was out of reach
buying a house in hobart was not
a possibility at all for me and so i
started looking
further afield she settled on a place in
queenstown
a 90 000 fixer-upper but a place to call
her own
to be able to to afford to
live without locking yourself into a
30-year mortgage or
working five days a week nine to five
and
not having a life figures from the real
estate institute suggest
others are having the same idea
queenstown house sales in the year to
september
rose by just over 40 percent so a
property like this i received an
authority to sell for and because we
have such a high buyer base
within half an hour i had an accepted
offer that's amazing would that have
happened 12 months ago
no queenstown's established artistic
community is also seen as a draw card
lea walpole grew up in queenstown but
never thought she'd be able to return
and progress her career as a graphic
designer
they come for the isolation i guess as
well that's one thing but
but also the sense of community i bought
the building and
obviously it was too big for just me so
i thought
why not share it and give the local
artists
you know the opportunity to exhibit
another factor giving investment to push
along
oh nice brand new
yeah do what you need over 60 kilometers
of new mountain biking trails are being
developed
there's definitely a real energy around
the town
yeah i think having that extra
confidence and seeing some real action
things are really starting to move yeah
nearby in the otherwise deserted town of
linda
zara trihe is starting up a cafe
we're really looking forward to looking
after those guys and pouring them good
coffee and
making them some good sustenance she has
a longer term plan to transform the
ruins of the adjacent royal hotel into
an eatery
while some local traditions are fading
there's no shortage of people with a
fresh vision for the town
it might have a different name and
function in a different way but i think
that
community spirit will will be
very strong for a long time
alexandra alvaro abc news
on the satellite a monsoon trough and
developing low over the northern tropics
are generating heavy rain
storms and gusty winds another trough
stretching from the wa interior to
northeast new south wales
is triggering showers and storms and a
hot air mass is spreading over wa
and queensland looking around the
country tomorrow a wet day for
queensland with showers in the west
late showers in the southeast and
clearing showers in the northeast in new
south wales and the act
showers and storms in the east late
showers elsewhere
a wet day in victoria as well with the
showers increasing in the southwest
late showers in the east in tasmania
mostly sunny in the northwest
late showers for the south and showers
in the northeast
showers for south australia's southeast
and north clearing showers in the
central parts and mostly sunny in the
west
a mostly sunny day in wa with the
exception of rain and storms
in the northeast and in the northern
territory
showers and storms for the north and
over the interior and heavy rain in the
south
looking ahead to tuesday's forecast for
the capital cities early showers for
sydney
showers for melbourne canberra and
hobart a sunny day in perth
possible shower for brisbane partly
cloudy in adelaide and
showers and a possible storm for darwin
with a top of 31.
and that is the latest from abc news i'm
gemma venice stay with us
stan grant's oneplus one is up next
[Applause]
[Music]
this will be a colorful adventure the
most intimate stories
i did not expect to feel this kind of
child like glee
a magical space it's brilliant it's so
silly but i just love it so much
i've been to many wonderful places but
none more extraordinary
than here the slave trade was the main
business still a feeling of anger for me
profound uh life-changing events this is
incredible anticipation builds
they're swapping the classroom for the
pressure cooker there's only going to be
one winner tonight it's not going to be
like at school where everyone gets a
ribbon
but will it be tom that's left feeling
the heat
you're probably thinking what's smoke
mean it's very much the definition of
utah
hard quiz kid special wednesday 7 30 on
abc and ivu
it's been a year like no other
unprecedented
unimaginable unfathomable there's only
one way to look back on the year that
was
20 bloody 20.
wednesday at 8 on abc in eye view
[Applause]
nine eight this new year's eve the
parties at yours
stay home with the abc for the biggest
night of the year
at 8 30 join rove for
and at nine charlie pickering and zan
rowe bring you australia's biggest stars
there's only one place to be this new
year's eve that's your place with the
abc
from 8 30 on abc and iview
whenever you want wherever you are know
the story with abc news
the most trusted news source get
breaking news updates with live
notifications
plus the latest news from australia and
around the world this will be the first
step in an ever expanding bubble go to
news.abc.net.eu
or download the news app the following
program contains
adult themes and course language
to oneplus one i'm stan grant alex
mckinnon grew up thinking that he knew
what it was to be a man
he looked at his father and he saw
strength he saw independence
he achieved everything he wanted as a
professional footballer
and then in one moment he lost it all
alex mckinnon had to learn what it was
to reinvent himself
he sat down with me for this discussion
about identity
[Applause]
[Music]
going into the turn
[Applause]
alex mckinnon welcome to oneplus one
thank you for having me
who is alex mckinnon it's a great
question
um i'm definitely a passionate caring
person
i feel like i'm very respectful and
i'm definitely a lover i love to
interact with people and to feel that
connection with people
yeah if i'd have asked you that
you know when you were 15 16 or 18 19
you were coming into playing football
if i'd have said who are you was the
first thing you would have said then
i'm a footballer yeah
and because that was that was absolutely
your world wasn't it from such a young
age in your family
football was just deeply embedded yeah
definitely
and i loved it and i still do love it
but
i didn't see anything else that's all i
could see
and i wasn't scared of that i enjoyed it
i feel like when you want to achieve
something in life you have to set your
eyes
on the task and go and get it and
a lot of people these days or even back
then kind of shared away
from or shied away from setting a goal
and really going for it
and that wasn't me i i wanted to play
nro i wanted to be the best that i could
you were a big diary keeper you'd write
down your goals you'd write down the
things you wanted to achieve
and you did that all the time i want to
achieve this i want to achieve this by
this age
and you said you set your mind on that
yeah and i
feel like i'm a really big observer i
love to watch and
and listen i think because i'm an only
child i've grown up in that space i
grew up around a rugby league club and
my dad was
really influential in the local
community so i was always felt like he
was the leader and i kind of sat behind
him as a young kid and
he always took me everywhere he went so
i was always watching and listening and
taking in all the good and bad things
and kind of filtering them out and
seeing what i could use for myself but i
i feel like i haven't let that go and
being able to
write and diary things for me is really
important and
even to this day it's really important
for me to diary because it clears my
thoughts and
i feel like when i'm having a good run
of emotions and
productive days it's when i am
journaling i'm glad you mentioned
your dad because you know reading about
you
and reading your book which i have here
in my hand
your dad was just so central he was a
football player
but he took all the lessons of life what
it took to be a man
you got from your dad didn't you yeah i
think i also
got it from him but how people perceived
him
um wasn't necessarily that he sat me
down and said this is how you do things
or um
this is what you need to do in this
situation it was more that he led with
it by example and
yeah very lucky to have a dad like i did
when i was a boy i grew up
similar sort of circumstances in a way
to you you know you grow up in small
country towns and
you know it's a working-class family and
a working-class culture and a very
masculine
culture dad was a footballer and a boxer
and
how i grew up seeing what it was to be a
man was to be physical
in that world he was a sawmiller he was
a footballer
he was a boxer the world that he was
preparing me for
was that world very very rigid
boundaries
tough tough lessons but it was very much
this sense that to be a man
was to be strong in the world for
yourself and for your family is that
what you saw with your dad
yeah definitely i think as well i'm
strong on your opinions
i think unquestioned
i think is something which i used to see
as how men
should be perceived and um a definite
presence
unquestionable strength is what
how i used to see a man
within that community and it's
definitely not how it should be
but that's how i would perceive it as
having a real strengths a real dominance
unquestioned i wouldn't say feared
but definitely a strong
presence i learned a lot about people
from my dad
[Music]
yeah i also learnt a lot from my dad
watching him go through i suppose the
transition of me being injured
and not having football such a forefront
in my life
and seeing how he handled that and
how he handled seeing his child be
injured
and the loss of certain things that he
could had lived in his life that
i or he thought that i wasn't going to
be able to do
how did he handle it it was tough to see
was it yeah
really tough um
really tough to see just i felt like
i could just see this anger yeah
um i felt like
a dad always wants to protect their
child and not see them injured and
give them everything in life and give
them the opportunity to
go and do things that they want and
at my age i think he thought that
i was coming into an era where i had
worked so hard to achieve a lot of
things in rugby league and set myself up
and
he felt that my life was just about to
be lived
with children and um to be able to
explore different things in life and i
felt that he
he thought that it was all over um
but that's where i suppose we are
different because i didn't see it like
that
yeah can i take you back to that to that
game against melbourne um and look if if
you don't want to go there i
absolutely understand because in the
book
when i was reading about that tackle and
that night it was like
you could recall every single
moment yeah where the opposing players
were how you felt the position
yeah you got yourself in can you go back
there to that moment for us
yeah i definitely can i know what it
felt like i remember hearing the noise i
remember trying to move but not being
able to
remember players surrounding me looking
at me
remember clear conversations i could
hear everything
who's around me
it sounds really weird but when you
are injured like that you can't feel
anything
but i really recall how cold it was
how silent it was on the night um
yeah i just really felt embarrassed to
be honest
embarrassed yeah i i suppose it takes
you back to
being a man and what what your identity
is there and
um strong unfathomable
um unwavering i just felt that
it was embarrassing that i was laying
there unable to move and i just felt
like a real
failure yeah did you know then
alex when everything went cold
and quiet how bad this was yeah
i knew straight away straight away
it's why when i went into the sheds that
i asked for my phone to call my mum
and my partner take him because i just i
knew it was very serious
i remember paul harrigan standing in the
sheds next to me
touching my legs touching my hands
that's what you're saying i couldn't
feel anything so
yeah and then you went to hospital then
the doctors
do the examination they look at you what
do they say yes i was
unconscious straight away for about
three to five days and
my first real recollection was somebody
standing over me
with a with a pin uh doing uh
an assessment of my body and that was
to kind of classify my injury um
obviously it was a spinal cord injury
but um
they try and assess feeling and reaction
and temperature and i felt at that point
when i was laying there
that i wasn't a human i was more of an
object
and it's something which i'd really
struggled with
a post being injured um
not attaching yourself to to me yeah i
mean
i felt like a real object and i was
not a human which sounds really weird
but
um when people start to treat your
injury
and the effect that an injury like that
can have on your life and how it
consumes you
you start to identify yourself with that
injury and not
myself alex mckinnon so on that night
that was a really clear reflection and
image that i can still see to this day
of a female
standing over me pricking my body trying
to assess me
not talking to me it was a really
really weird feeling there's a part of
the book that um
when when i read it i just um i had to
uh i had to put it down you know i had
to put it down
several times um i'm going to ask you to
read it
if you wouldn't mind um
and then i'll ask you about that person
and that in that night can i get you to
read from
alone just down to the past yeah put it
here in my life that's okay
perfect just for you down to there
it's the first time i've read this yeah
alone in my ward the pent-up anger and
frustration had taken over my emotions
and i wasn't willing to fight any longer
i began to yell and sob as tears
streamed down my face
my parents were outside and down the
hall rushed to my bedside
finding their hysteric 22 year old son
in a state of despair
i'm [__] over this i don't want to be
here
i screamed this is making me sick to my
stomach why can't i just die
why can't you just kill me why are you
going to put me through this
how can you let me live like this
is it just for yourself i'm happy to die
i want this over
why why why yeah
to be honest it's probably something
that i've forgotten about
yeah it's hard when you asked me to read
that i didn't know what you're asking me
to read to be honest
and that's honestly how i felt on the
on the weeks after i was injured
i felt like i was alive just for them
and
um
i had no idea what
my life was going to be like um
post my injury yeah thanks thanks for
reading it alex
it's um to be honest with you when i
when i read that
and uh and i and i
i try to put myself in that in that
position it's
you know i speak like that's probably
why we
while we read stories you know we want
to know what it's like
um and i've i've asked myself this a lot
i've really struggled with this what
would i do
you know would i have the strength
to want to go on could i
go on what what would i be
what what would i be as a as a person as
a man i mean you said
you didn't feel like you were human
anymore i really don't know
i really don't know alex how i would
how did you it took a lot of time
um
it's a hard one to answer to be
completely honest i don't know
how i am in the position that i am today
um mentally
i'm a big believer that sometimes you
just need to ride the wave
you just need to trust that over time
that things will not be what they will
be because you need to be productive
and you need to attack it but time is a
beautiful thing it can
you just sometimes need to give
something time and at that time
in my life i didn't want to go on
i felt that my parents were being really
selfish
that my injury was really serious
and i didn't want to live a life in a
wheelchair and that's what my mind was
fixated on
i couldn't see what my life would be
like
yeah and it comes back to that thing
isn't it you talked about your dad and
you're watching your dad and your dad's
struggling
you know this guy who had all the
answers you know the guy that you look
to this is what a man is
yeah and then you've fulfilled all of
that
you're that man do you have to then
start saying to yourself
what is a man now yeah who is alex
mckinnon
now yeah when all that's taken away from
you what was the answer to that
um i don't know the answer
i i feel like
i'd never seen a man reinvent themselves
i'd never seen a man
be vulnerable
yes i that's what i was scared of
having to reinvent myself having to
start again
having to try new things
i felt like i'd worked so hard just so
hard to put myself in the position that
i had
and in a position that i never felt like
i'd ever
be in i never felt like i'd play first
grade as much as i wanted that
i never felt like i would do it um
i never felt that i would have the
contract that i had
even signing it i was just going what
i can't believe i've got this all the
money my beautiful partner yeah
i never felt that i would ever be worthy
of having someone like her
um a home that i'd bought um sounds
really weird but a lawn demo
i never felt like i would have those
things i don't know why i felt like that
but on that night when everything was
taken away i just felt ripped off
i felt really comfortable with where i
was in my life and
um having things that i never felt like
i would ever have
and i was so scared that all of those
things
were no longer going to be there and i
was going to have to start again
um yeah one of those things
was not only there but it's still there
and that's that's tegan
you said before when you go into the
shed you called your mum
and you called tegan tell us about
teagan
she's an incredible girl a woman
she's a real credit to her family as
well i see a lot of her
family in her and um
she just goes and does things and she
doesn't think
and she just
goes and gets things done she doesn't
get overruled by certain things and
um yeah she's been life-changing for me
did you ever wonder there and then that
night
would you know you were going to be
tested you know it's going to test the
relationship did you think at that point
that it would survive i knew it wouldn't
break her
i thought it would break me um
i'm somebody that loves to see joy in
people i'm a giver that's just who i am
i love to
provide and give people things and see
joy
i remember saying to myself i i want to
work so hard to give
tegan a beautiful home to give tegan a
family i like to be able to give things
to her and give her the life that she
deserves and
i remember feeling on that night that
she wouldn't leave me
um or she wouldn't
get sick of me i felt that i would get
sick
of her not being able to do
what we used to be able to do so that's
what i was scared of
on that night how do you go from that
moment where you're wondering whether
you would break
um and you don't want to live
to being able to ask tegan to marry you
yeah
things move fast um thoughts
in my head moved fast
[Music]
i remember laying there and talking to
tegan about
us the situation that we're in
that i was scared
that i loved her
and that i'd planned on
asking her to marry me i wasn't saying
it like this is what i've got planned
um so let's do it now
i was more saying look this is
everything that's been taken away like i
can't do this i can't do that
i love you and this is what i was going
to do
in a sense and then she kind of says
that doesn't
change anything like we're still
the same people we still love each other
let's
let's just do it so for me
at that point i kind of went oh okay
yeah she took she took chat yeah she
took me up on her and
yeah it's strange to reflect back on
those things but i
um i suppose one of the big motivations
in my
life is to be able to provide for her
and
and be me and i think that's one of the
biggest
things that in a relationship you can't
lose
yourself and the hard thing for me was
going through this injury
i didn't know who i was i really lost
myself
i lost my my identity to rugby league
because that's who i was
the beauty is that she's been with me
through the whole thing and allowed me
to find myself again
allowed me to really sit in some dark
spots
and really self-examine myself
you ask me who i am to some people that
can be a really
violating question exposing feeling like
you're vulnerable um naked standing in
front of a mirror
people sometimes don't like to look at
themselves
but for me that's where i had to sit
and i sat in that in that spot sometimes
for months
really scared really dark
really frustrated but i knew it was a
space that i had to sit in
to kind of find myself and we're talking
about teagan here and
the journey that we've been on she's
supported me through that whole thing
not through advice not through
something that she said but just her
actions
sometimes she didn't expect much from me
and sometimes
i think i've been absent in our
relationship because
i've had to be selfish
but essentially it allowed me to find me
and um
that's what i bring to our relationship
now funny
you know this word love that we throw
around and you use it so
so easily um
love must mean very different things do
you now
yeah it does yeah um
i'm i'm very lucky very very lucky and
i don't think i would say i didn't think
i would say that
um but some of the positions that me and
teagan have been
in some of the things that she's had to
do for me
yeah there's no other reason to do it
than that you love somebody
and i'm very lucky
that i have her you still in the
darkness sometimes
is it does it go away are you still
there sometimes
looking at that self going into yourself
asking
those questions i feel like now i don't
i'm not in that space
for a long period
initially i used to sit in a very
depressed negative space i'm searching
for answers or ways or myself
for an extended period of time days
weeks but now i don't
really at all to be honest i feel really
comfortable
with who i am um i
really respect my injury you know i mean
i respect my health
and it's probably something before that
i never did it's an interesting thing to
say
respect the injury what do you mean by
that
uh i suppose
where i spoke before around that person
examining me and everything that
essentially this injury has done to my
life i hated it
i showed it no respect i didn't research
it i didn't
learn how to live with it i didn't want
to talk to other people in the
situations because i was scared
of what they would say about living with
this
i wanted to do it myself i wanted to not
be
conformed by other people's experience
of living with a spinal cord injury
i wanted to learn my own way and that's
the hard way
and to be honest it it means that i've
made mistakes
for those that don't know that this
spinal cord injury is a very
it's a very rare injury it's not meant
to happen or occur in australia or in
the world
yearly they're very different so
trial and error is really important and
having confidence to find the right
resources and the right
specialist to trust and
i feel like sometimes when i get in that
negative space so i don't respect the
injury
it can make you pay sometimes that's
weeks or months laying in bed sometimes
that's
gaining weight or losing weight
sometimes it really affects your mental
mindset
um and cannot allow you to live a life
and
something which i say to myself all the
time you need to respect the injury
otherwise
it can control you yeah you said before
you'd never seen a man
reinvent himself and you have reinvented
yourself you look at the reinvention of
alex mckinnon today
husband father you're still involved
with the newcastle rights you're still
working
in rugby league it's an incredible
reinvention isn't it yeah
yeah it is that's what i'm more proud
about it sounds really strange that's
not an objective or something that you
can see but
i definitely feel that i am who i'm
meant to be
i i feel the emotion i feel
that i'm not trapped i cry about my
daughter getting older
yeah i mean i cry about being so
grateful i feel like i'm really in tune
with my emotions and i like that
because that's who i feel like i'm meant
to be
and i believe that before
um when i was playing football
i was only young i was only 22 years old
so i had a lot to learn
but i felt like i was really trapped
anxious
didn't want to fail but now i don't
i don't approach life in that way i'm
not scared to make mistakes i want to
learn
i approach things with a lot of respect
and i'm really in tune with who i am
and i encourage people to do that i mean
yeah i'm a very passionate person and
i really only want good for people and
just very clear with those
values and that's me and
that's why i believe that what happened
to me
was meant to happen and it sounds crazy
but if
you could say to me would you take
things back and go back to where you
were i really wouldn't
i just wouldn't i i'm very lucky with
the position that i am in
and how i feel about myself and my life
and
but i'm so grateful with what i have in
my life and i'm
going to do everything that i can to
make the most of it yeah
i think that starts with me well there's
someone who likes um
who likes giving you've um you've given
us a lot alex thank you so much it's
been an absolute pleasure
to talk to you on oneplus one thank you
thank you very much
grandstand summer of cricket continues
live and ad free
as australia face off against fierce
rivals indian
all the rivalry called live at the
grounds
grandstand summer of cricket live on abc
radio and the abc listen app
this summer it's family time anytime
that was a gift she gave us all a gift
[Music]
this changes everything
feels like a dream reef time zoo time
family time anytime
[Music]
summer time streaming on abc iview
they're swapping the classroom for the
pressure cooker there's only going to be
one winner tonight
it's not going to be like at school
where everyone gets a ribbon but will it
be tom
that's left feeling the heat you're
probably thinking what's smug mean
it's very much the definition of utah
hard quiz kid special
wednesday 7 30 on abc and eye view
know the tradition cultural birth brings
the land back to life
know the reason the most important thing
to me as a gundangara person is
protecting country for future
generations
know the languages reporting from our in
the country lara kia country
reporting from ghana country reporting
from pinematic from larakia country
i'm on your toyota country from nepaluna
lutrowita
for abc news know the meaning i in this
country this country is me
know the story with abc news
tonight restrictions return for greater
sydney as the northern beaches cluster
grows
and states and territories slam the door
shut on their borders
[Music]
uk prime minister boris johnson forces
millions into lockdown over
christmas as infections keep climbing
and tonight's special report how three
communities that suffered some of the
worst bushfires
are getting on a year later
hello and welcome to abc news i'm gemma
vanessa
sydney has recorded 30 new coronavirus
cases
all by two are linked to the outbreak on
the northern beaches
states and territories have moved
quickly to protect their residents
introducing new rules to stop the spread
of the virus
covid restrictions are back for the
greater sydney region
including caps on the number of people
allowed to visit homes
ashley raper begins our coverage life on
the northern beaches
is officially on hold the peninsula is
24 hours into its lockdown
as the rest of sydney watches and waits
i think it's the right thing to do and
hopefully
we can nip it in the bud before it gets
really big yeah it's pretty tough
um especially with the weather because
we've got quite a small house we're kind
of locked up inside
there have been 30 new locally acquired
cases in new south wales
28 are connected to the avalon cluster
taking it to 68
in total the source of the other two
cases isn't known
but both are on the northern beaches the
one
positive is we still have not seen
evidence
of massive seeding outside of the
northern beaches community
just how the virus traveled to the
northern beaches remains a mystery
whilst i really do want to find the
source
it may be that this is going to be a
challenge beyond us
but to be perfectly frank our focus now
is also
just as avid on trying to lock down this
and control this cluster the prime
minister sent a message of support
while on leave everyone's working
together we're working the problem
to get on top of it to ensure that we
can return to as
as normal a covert situation as we can
as those outside of the northern beaches
responded to calls for testing
the government also announced greater
sydney and the central coast
will again be subjected to tighter
restrictions
from midnight tonight until midnight on
wednesday there can only be ten visitors
in a home
the one person per four square meter
rule will be reinstated at all
indoor places there'll also be a limit
of 300 people at hospitality venues and
places of worship
dancing is again banned so too is
singing and chanting
i've just got to say for the moment it's
probably one of the most dangerous
exercises you can do dancing and singing
the government also wants everybody to
wear masks limit outings and
stay in sydney it's also urging people
not to visit relatives in aged care
homes
but these are all advised not mandatory
there are hard new rules though on
people from greater sydney entering
south australia
the northern territory the australian
capital territory
queensland and victoria the borders
are closing it's appropriate that we
take these steps rather than waiting for
new south wales to have a different set
of rules in place i can't control what
they what they do
i can only control our border so it's a
time of increasing
uncertainty here in sydney and it's
likely we won't know until wednesday
what we can or can't do
on christmas day for people on the
northern beaches
the case numbers will be watched closely
and then for the rest of the city
it's going to come down to whether more
cases pop up
outside of the peninsula ashley raper
abc news sydney the situation on the
borders is changing rapidly
late this afternoon the act declared
greater sydney a hot spot
everyone traveling to canberra from
sydney will have to quarantine from
midnight tonight
the northern territory also made a late
change warning passengers who were
already in the air this afternoon
they could return to sydney for free or
enter two weeks quarantine on arrival
gene kennedy explains the new border
rules
travel restrictions are back victoria
will ban travellers from greater sydney
and the central coast
from midnight to night those who do head
south
will require 14 days of hotel quarantine
it's declared the northern beach is a
hot zone saying
no one from that area can cross the
border
you must stay in your state to keep
victorians safe
and to play your part in a national
covert 19
policy response victorians who have been
in greater sydney
have extra time to make it home they'll
still need to quarantine
but can do it at home if they arrive by
midnight monday
those living in border communities can
still travel within the border bubble
with driver's license checks the rest of
new south wales remains green
and travels south of the border is
allowed with a permit
queensland has announced similar
restrictions
asking travellers from greater sydney
not to come north
after 1am tomorrow we love you
we want you to have a peaceful christmas
at home
and hopefully in the months to come
we'll be able to welcome welcome you
back people from the sunshine state
have until tuesday to get home without
quarantining
but they will be tested on arrival south
australia has also banned arrivals from
the northern beaches
anyone from greater sydney arriving
after midnight
will have to complete two weeks of hotel
quarantine
i think we can feel you know quietly
positive about
what is happening in new south wales but
we do need to put things in place to
make sure
that south australia remains safe
wa has a hard border in place with new
south wales
as of midnight last night what would be
awful
is if the virus came into western
australia and we had to shut down parts
of the state for christmas
tasmania has also banned those from the
northern beaches
all together but those from across
greater sydney are allowed
as long as they go into quarantine for a
fortnight
the northern territory has declared
greater sydney the blue mountains
illawarra and the central coast
hot spots anyone arriving from those
locations will need to foot the two-week
quarantine bill
arrivals into perth from sydney have
slowed to a trickle since western
australia slammed its border shut
overnight
people from new south wales now require
special approval to be allowed to enter
and the mcgowan government is warning
there will be few exemptions
arriving in the nick of time these
travelers made it into wa just before
the clock struck midnight
we only changed our flight yesterday
we're meant to fly next week so
we made the right choice we actually
moved our flights forward so like you
know just
very lucky basically but many others
weren't
scores of would-be travelers are now
stranded on the other side of the
country
once the border slammed shut arrivals
from sydney
all but ground to a halt most flights
were cancelled
and those that went ahead had just a
small handful of passengers on board
extremely lucky and extremely grateful
and very happy to quarantine and do
everything i'm supposed to do
14 days in isolation awaits those
arrivals but most were just happy to be
allowed in at all
good to be home i don't care as long as
i'm with my girls i really don't care
with the heart border now in place
indefinitely no one from new south wales
can enter wa without a valid exemption
a bitter pill to swallow for sydney
siders with family in the west
unsure when they'll be able to see them
again and now i don't know
now i don't know what i'm i don't know
what my plans are and
um you yeah when i'll be able to come
back
and uh yeah what what i'll be doing for
christmas i guess
exemptions are available for essential
workers and people who make
compassionate grounds such as west
australians who'd recently traveled east
but the government says few approvals
will be granted
what we did yesterday was pretty
extraordinary but necessary
and it will be sad for many people an
extraordinary step being replicated
across the country
with all states now imposing strict
travel rules on sydney siders
throwing christmas plans into disarray
around australia
in some jurisdictions including
queensland and victoria
arrivals from greater sydney will even
be forced into hotel quarantine
if you are a new south wales resident in
greater sydney
please do not come to queensland the wa
premier has been unimpressed with the
way new south wales has handled the
pandemic
accusing the state of trying to play
whack-a-mole
rather than kill the virus but critics
say that mark mcgowan's commentary isn't
helpful
i also think all western australians
would expect that the government work
together
across the state border with all
governments to make sure we can help
combat this virus as a country
but the premier is pleading provocation
under the new south wales government as
they have
for months on end have attacked western
australia i respond
wa is set to announce within days when
quarantine-free travel will be allowed
from south australia
jacob keiki abc news families in london
and south eastern england have had their
christmas plans thwarted because the
british prime minister changed his mind
and brought in severe restrictions the
number of infections in the uk
is soaring reaching up to 35 000 cases a
day
the sudden rise is believed to be driven
by a new variant of the virus
from london europe correspondent nick
dole reports
just days out from christmas a decision
to severely limit the festive cheer
it is with a very heavy heart i must
tell you we cannot continue
with christmas as planned london and
southeast england were
already under the highest lockdown
measures under a three-tier system
but health authorities say they're
seeing a new more transmissible variant
of the virus
and they've created a new level of
restrictions in response
in england those living in tier four
areas should not mix
with anyone outside their own household
at christmas
the new variant is raising fears that
health services won't be able to cope
nearly 90 percent of hospital beds in
england are currently full
it is moving very quickly through the
community i suspect it will
become the dominant strain over the next
several months
the fisa vaccine has already been given
to 350 000 people across the uk
the government says it should be
effective against the new strain
probably but it is a probably with a
capital p
these new vaccines are effectively like
emails that we send to the immune system
and they're editable
the prime minister said the new
variant's speed of transmission meant he
had no choice but to act
just days ago boris johnson said it
would be inhuman to cancel christmas
kind of upset about it but what can we
do we will lose out but at the end of
the
as i said effort will help us we've got
to do it
but for leslie nelson the decision has
far greater consequences
it just seems so unfair for somebody
like me
i'm terminally ill i won't be here next
christmas
my sister's going to be sitting at home
by herself 100 miles away
and her presence is under the tree many
people's hopes of a happy ending to a
very tough year
have now been dashed nick dole abc news
london
australia's worst bushfires have long
been known by colloquial terms such as
black saturday black tuesday or black
friday
but the devastation they caused last
year was so extensive
and went on for so long it's now
remembered as a black summer
and it's over the next few weeks that
many communities will stop to remember
what happened a year ago
in tonight's special report we revisit
three of the hardest hit
it's nearly christmas in malikuda this
time of year will be very difficult for
communities like this one
as people remember the trauma they went
through and what they lost
in the bushfires 33 people died around
the country
two of them here on kangaroo island
alongside those tragedies
towns were devastated the natural
environments that we live in were
decimated
and it's feared some animal populations
might not recover
but people are coming together the
debris is being cleared ready to rebuild
with a long road still ahead many say
their communities are stronger and
there's optimism for the future
whether that's in malakuta or on
kangaroo island
or here in kabago tonight we'll look at
how these three communities are going
one year after the black summer fires
[Music]
cabargo is a community of fewer than 800
people on the south coast of new south
wales
the scars on the main street are a
constant reminder of last summer
when fires roared out of the forest west
of the town on new year's eve
even the most well-prepared were caught
by surprise
it came a lot quicker and with far more
ferocity
and fury than anybody had anticipated
helen shafer and her husband wayne
fought for hours to save their timber
house
when the front finally passed wayne was
temporarily blinded
the drive to hospital brought the
devastation home
hundreds of homes destroyed and hundreds
of animals killed in the blaze
most were dead but they were in piles
they'd been
running from the fire but the fire was
so quick they couldn't outrun it
and they were in a v-shape it
stacked on top of each other
the small community suffered tragedies
dairy farmer june tarlanton's father
ross rixon was one of four people killed
my dad was an iconic australian bushman
i'm proud of that
one of the great things is that he
doesn't have to come back and see the
bush as it is
because i think that would broke his
heart
when i look along the ridges and i see
the dead trees
i can't comprehend how it's ever going
to grow back
a year after losing her husband patrick
and his father robert
renee solway is finding her own way of
moving forward
the first hot day was difficult for me
um yeah and then
you think about you know also this time
last year what you're doing and
and how you weren't touched then
she's opened her own hairdressing salon
in town
finding comfort in making other
residents feel better about themselves
if i can provide a service that
brings that to people it really makes me
happy in
one part of my life i think time is
what's going to do the healing
and everything to rebuild is taking time
the paddocks around cabargo are vivid
green after years of crippling drought
but the tragedy of the fires will be
written in the landscape for years to
[Music]
come
on an island incinerated by fire
signs of life are also emerging
we have picked up some pretty amazing
threatened species that have survived in
some of these really burnt areas
but our biggest work now is trying to
protect what's left
while it's regenerating fire tore
through two-thirds of kangaroo island
claiming the lives of dick lang
and his son clayton destroying nearly 90
homes
and killing about a million animals
this area used to house the island's
biggest dun art population
numbers have declined since the fires
but the nocturnal mammal has now been
caught on camera
there we go it's going to take a long
time there may be species that aren't
going to bounce back but we just don't
know that yet
[Music]
hope of resuming a normal life is now on
the horizon for many kangaroo island
locals
with new homes nearing completion yeah
it would be very nice
there was a lot of months there that we
felt like we weren't getting anywhere
but
the last three months i suppose we've
come in leaps and bounds and yeah i've
been a lot of support and help out here
billy buick had no idea the fire was
literally on her doorstep when she was
home alone
there were no evacuation orders and it
was a chance phone call
to a neighbour that saved her life
a year on as the couple prepares to
bring a baby into their new home
concerns around poor communication and
lack of warnings
are heightened she rang me screaming
because she couldn't see the road
and yeah she just got out so i was lucky
there's lucky more people than diving
[Applause]
as the dust settles on a rough year for
john simon's rebuilding his home
sharing shed and farm he also wants to
see
change yeah if i'm sounding pretty
pretty paid off and spot on i
am didn't need to be
john simons is calling for permanent
fire breaks in flinders chase national
park
where a lightning strike ignited the
fire
the bushfire royal commission also
recommended better fuel reduction
something john simon says could have
saved many properties